---
layout: page
title: Tech Series
order: 6
categories: 
- "events"
- "2006"
---

#### 2007

**May 25**

1.  Zeyun Yu, Ph.D. **Adaptive Mesh Generation for Biomolecules**
2.  Guillaume Vareille. **Recent Advances in DejaVu viewer framework and
    Vision visual programming environment**
3.  Wes Goodman New NBCR Member Presentation

**July 26**

1.  Yuhui Cheng, Ph.D. **Time Dependent Solver for the Smoluchowski
    Equation using FETK**
2.  Tim Kaiser, Ph.D. **Optimization of Parallel Execution of
    Applications for Cluster and Grid Environment: Continuity and
    3D-Myocyte**
3.  Jane Ren, M.S. **The SPRNG Library: Scalable Parallel Random Number
    Generator** and **Software Development and Distribution Best
    Practices: SMOL**

**September 10**

1.  Robert Konecny, Ph.D. **APBS Roll and iAPBS interfaces to Amber, NAMD**
2.  Nathan Baker, Ph.D.**APBS and PDB2PQR: Recent Development and Future Directions**
3.  Sriram Krishnan, Ph.D.**Opal based web services for APBS and PDB2PQR**
4.  Sargis Dallakyan, Ph.D.**APBSCommand: New Volume Rendering Tools for
    Electrostatics Studies inside MGLTools**

**November 7** SC07 Presentations Preview:

1.  Sriram Krishnan, Ph.D. **Recent Progress of the Opal toolkit and GAMA SSO support**
2.  Luca Clementi, M.S. **Automated application deployment in the grid
    environment: Interface generation for the Opal toolkit**
3.  Zhaohui Ding, M.S. **Grid Interoperability using CSF4: Experiences
    from the Avian Flu Grid project**
4.  Tim Kaiser, Ph.D. **Heart Beat Simulations using Continuity:
    Optimization for Scalability and Opal based Application Deployment**
5.  Wes Goodman, B.S. **Production Use cases of the Opal toolkit: MEME,
    PDB2PQR, APBS, AutoDock**
6.  Jane Ren, M.S. **Visualization of Simulation and Docking Results in
    Tile Display Wall**

**December 13**

1.  Anushka Mihaylova, Ph.D & Yuhui Cheng, Ph.D.: **Effects of cellular
    Ca2+ flux localization and t-tubule geometry on cardiac
    excitation-contraction coupling**
2.  Zeyun Yu, Ph.D: **Multiscale Geometric Modeling of Ventricular
    Myocytes: Bridging the Gap between Imaging and Simulation**
3.  Adam Wright: **Conduction Slowing and Passive Tissue Property
    Changes During Myocardial Stretch**

<br>

#### 2008

**January 17**

1.  Lily Cheng, Dong Xu, Ph.D. **Ensemble-based Virtual Screening
    Reveals Novel Antiviral Compounds for Avian Influenza Neuraminidase**
2.  Sargis Dallakyan, Ph.D. **PyRX, a WxPython based high throughput
    screening tool for autodock4**
3.  Demo and Discussion: **Opal Dashboard & Web Service Toolkit:
    workflow management through the Vision framework**

**July 24**

1.  Dong Xu, Ph.D., **Topological studies of sialo-pentasaccharide
    receptor analogues for hemagglutinins using molecular dynamics**
2.  Jane Ren, M.S., **NBCR Virtual Desktop: prototypes using VMWare and
    Rocks V**
3.  Fred Lionetti, Jane Ren, **Continuity web service for dynamic
    compilation and CellML based simulations**

**September 3**

1.  Jonghyun Lee: **Design and implemention of the Avian-Flu Grid DSE
    (Data Sharing Environment)**
    Applied Grid Computing Lab
    Konkuk University
    Abstract:
    The goal of the avain flu DSE is to develop a grid-based simulation
    data sharing system for the Avian Flu Grid project.
    [http://avianflugrid.pragma-grid.net/](http://avianflugrid.pragma-grid.net/ "http://avianflugrid.pragma-grid.net/").
    This system is comprised of (1) portal-based GUI for accessing
    avian-flu simulation data, (2) XML Schema based metadata management
    system called X-SIGMA, (3) GridFTP-based distributed data management
    tool for uploading/downloading simulation results, (4) MyProxy
    server for storing community cridential. In this seminar, we
    introduce to the design and implemention the Avian Flu Grid DSE and
    demonstrate the GUI of the DSE, followed by a discussion of the data
    model for the simulation data and other functionalities of the DSE
    under development.
2.  Luca Clementi: **NBCR Science Gateway: Transparent Access to Remote
    Resources Through Rich Desktop Clients**
    NBCR
    UCSD
    Abstract: The NBCR aims to develop, integrate, and deliver advanced
    cyberinfrastructure for biomedical computation and simulation
    workflows and acts as a science gateway to national grid resources
    such as the Teragrid,
    [http://www.teragrid.org](http://www.teragrid.org "http://www.teragrid.org").
    To speed up novel discoveries and reduce the learning curve, we have
    adopted tools which hide the complexity of the underlaying
    infrastructure. Here we present prototypes of the infrastructure
    developed for the computer aided drug discovery pipeline and how it
    has impacted research in the Avian Flu Grid project. In particular
    we describe Vision, a visual programming environment used to define
    scientific workflows, and Opal, an automatic Web service wrappers
    for scientific applications on Grid resources, and how they are
    integrated with other established backend technologies.
3.  Discussion: Simulation data management

<br>

#### 2009

**June 18**

Rommie Amaro, Ph.D. **The role of secondary sialic acid binding sites in
N1**

Within influenza viral particles, the intricate balance between host
cell binding and sialic acid receptor destruction is carefully
maintained by the hemaggluttin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA)
glycoproteins, respectively. A major outstanding question in influenza
biology is the function of a secondary sialic acid (SA) binding site on
the NA enzyme. This second site was first discovered through HA activity
exhibited by the N9 subtype in avian isolates. This activity, termed
hemabsorbing (HB) for its ability to bind red blood cells, was shown to
be transferable to the N2 subtype by site-directed mutagenesis, and
structural proof for this secondary binding site was later established
through x-ray crystallography. The conservation of residues surrounding
this secondary site in avian strains, but not human or swine, suggested
that this feature may play an unknown biological role in the avian
subtypes, and a careful analysis of individual strains further indicated
positive selection pressure in the HB site within the avian strains.
Here, we use Brownian dynamics (BD) simulations to investigate the
effects of this secondary SA binding site in the avian N1 subtype. These
BD simulations allow for the calculation of the second-order association
rate constant of a ligand to a pre-defined binding site. Using simple
geometric criteria, we are able to define separate encounter complexes
and monitor the association kinetics to both the active and secondary
sialic acid binding sites. Our work quantitatively suggests that the
secondary binding site may play an important role in the recognition of
these receptors by N1, by facilitating the formation of complexes with
the NA protein and the SA receptors. Moreover, this site is able to
electrostatically steer inhibitor binding, albeit with reduced capacity.

Dong Xu, Ph.D. **AutoDock2MMGBSA, a rescoring tool for AutoDock**

Autodock2MMGBSA (A2M) is an automated tool currently under development
for rescore and refine the docking results from Autodock and other
docking programs. A2M uses MM-GBSA (Molecular Mechanics-Generalized Born
Surface Area), a higher level of theory than most docking scoring
functions, to re-calculate the binding free energies. Ligand binding
poses can be also improved through implicit solvent GB energy
minimization and Molecular Dynamics simulations. A2M seamlessly
integrates a fragment-based ligand structure hopping feature with
MM-GBSA, offering a new and efficient avenue for novel drug design.
Preliminary tests on avian influenza Neuraminidase show that A2M
predicts the correct ligand ranking compared to experimental data and
the results are also sensitive enough to detect the effect of receptor
single-point mutation on ligand binding.

Jacob Durrant **AutoGrow and AutoClick: Novel Drug-Design Algorithms
that Combine Fragment-Based Growing and Computer Docking**

Due in part to the increasing availability of crystallographic protein
structures as well as rapid improvements in computing power, the past
few decades have seen an explosion in the field of computer-based
rational drug design. Several algorithms have been developed to identify
or generate potential ligands in silico by optimizing the
ligand-receptor hydrogen bond, electrostatic, and hydrophobic
interactions. AutoGrow is a novel computer-aided drug design algorithm
that combines the strengths of both fragment-based growing and docking
algorithms. Additionally, a related ongoing project, AutoClick,
generates only novel compounds that can be easily synthesized by organic
chemists.

**July 16**

David Goodsell, Ph.D. **AutoDock 4.2 and AutoDockTools**

We have recently released the new version of AutoDock, AutoDock4.2,
along with the new version of the graphical user interface
AutoDockTools. AutoDock4.2 uses an empirical free energy force field,
which includes a directional hydrogen bonding potential, a volume-based
desolvation potential, and a screened Coulomb potential for
electrostatics. Several search methods are available, including a hybrid
method that combines a genetic algorithm and local search, and simulated
annealing. AutoDock4.2 now models limited flexibility in the receptor as
well as torsional rotations in the ligand. Several extensions of the
basic AutoDock method will be discussed, including modeling of flexible
rings, a mutable atom technique for drug development, analysis of
covalent complexes, and biased dockings that incorporate observed
binding conformations.

Oleg Trott, Ph.D. **AutoDock Vina: Improving the Speed and Accuracy of
Docking with a New Scoring Function, Efficient Optimization, and
Multithreading**

AutoDock Vina, a new program for molecular docking and virtual
screening, is presented. AutoDock Vina achieves an approximately two
orders of magnitude speed-up compared with the molecular docking
software previously developed in our lab (AutoDock 4), while also
significantly improving the accuracy of the binding mode predictions,
judging by our tests on the training set used in AutoDock 4 development.
Further speed-up is achieved from parallelism, by using multithreading
on multicore machines. AutoDock Vina automatically calculates the grid
maps and clusters the results in a way transparent to the user.

Rodney M. Harris, Ph.D. **AutoLigand: A Tool for Finding Ligand Binding Sites**

AutoLigand is a grid-based tool that locates ligand binding sites and
produces a contiguous fill volume optimized on affinity values at those
sites. AutoLigand has two modes of operation. The first mode (the
scanning mode) identifies up to ten binding sites over the entire
receptor molecule, places an optimal fill volume in each and ranks the
results based on total energy per volume. The second mode (single
starting point) lets the user input a starting point where an optimal
fill volume is generated. The second mode has a Graphical User Interface
(GUI) which allows the user to select fill volume starting points by
clicking on a location on the receptor molecule directly in the
AutoDockTools viewer window and produces fill volumes in real time. The
algorithm used to generate the fill volumes is divided into three
phases: 1) Flood fill, 2) Migration optimization, and 3) Extension
search (to prevent trapping in a local minimum). When multiple runs are
completed with different numbers of fill points, the results may be
plotted as total energy per volume vs. fill volume and used to identify
the strongest binding sites. AutoLigand was applied to the HIV protease
receptor and was able to locate not only the active site, but also an
allosteric site in the flap region of the enzyme. Collaborative crystal
studies have found fragment molecules binding to the allosteric site and
ongoing research is being conducted to develop stronger binding
compounds at this site and characterize their effects on protease
activity.

**September 23**

Kejun Kevin Dong, Ph.D. **Real Time Frame-based Biomedical Data
Streaming**

Biomedical research often involves receiving and analyzing gigabytes to
terabytes of data, generated by scientific instruments and applications
from the grid/cloud computing environment. For biomedical scientists
conducting simulation experiments, they currently have to wait for days
to months to visualize and analyze their frame-based data. To enhance
the ability to see and analyze their data in real time, we have
developed a system to monitor and visualize the on-going simulation
experiments. We have developed the support for molecular dynamic
simulation software, e.g. NAMD, by streaming data frames from
supercomputers to various clients, using the RBNB dataturbine
middleware. A prototype RBNB dataturbine cloud has been set up,
consisting of RBNB dataturbine servers at NBCR (vm5.ucsd.edu) and CNIC
(dt.escience.cn), for the biomedical data streaming service. For
visualization, our data turbine service supports visualization using an
extended version of JMol
([http://jmol.sourceforge.net/](http://jmol.sourceforge.net/ "http://jmol.sourceforge.net/"))
software, an open-source Java viewer for chemical structures in 3D, to
fetch pdb frames from RBNB dataturbine servers and realize sink-enabled
web-based 3D visualization. Other visualization environments such as the
Realtime Data Viewer (RDV), Cave Automatic Virtual Environment (CAVE),
and Tile Display Walls may be supported with customized plugins.

Jane Ren **Vision-based Workflow environment for Accessing Opal-enabled
Scientific Software as a Service (SaaS)**

Vision is a Python based workflow environment with a visual programming
interface. We have recently developed a computational workflow using
Vision nodes to support Computer Aided Drug Discovery (CADD), using a
service oriented computing architecture. Key applications such as
PDB2PQR, AutoDock are deployed as Opal-enabled web services with a
scalable computing backend, using cluster or cloud computing services.
Recently, the metascheduler CSF4 has been integrated into the CADD
workflow to distribute virtual screening experiments at sites in Japan
and the US, part of the PRAGMA grid. Vision nodes for NAMD simulation
using the TeraGrid resources are also under development, and a prototype
environment using the CSF4 to send NAMD simulation to the TeraGrid has
been established. In this talk, the progress towards supporting the
Relaxed Complex Scheme (RCS) using NAMD and AutoDock using the Vision
workflow environment will be reported. Future support for real time
visualization of MD and docking simulations will be discussed.

Kevin Wu **Visualization of MD Trajectories on the CAVE and Tiled
Display Wall using COVISE**

Molecular dyamics (MD) trajectories are data from simulation experiments
of molecular interactions over a predefined time scale achievable with
available computational resources over a period of time. MD simulations
may be used to model biological systems such as protein ligand
interactions under solvated conditions. They may be applied in
conjunction with other computational methods such as the Relaxed Complex
Scheme (RCS) for drug discovery and investigation of host pathogen
interactions. The scientists would benifit from examining the data
within a thorough, immersive, and in depth viewing environment of the
simulation in real time, and at different locations for collaborative
discovery. We present the progress on the development of a customized
plugin for real time visualization of MD trajectory data using the
COllaborative VIsualization and Simulation Environment (COVISE) in the
StarCAVE and the Tiled Display Wall (TDW). This plugin uses a ringbuffer
system to retrieve frame-based data from a dataturbine server, and
display the information in 3D.

**December 17**

Masahiko HOSHIJIMA, MD PhD, Affiliation: Department of Medicine and the
Center for Research in Biological Systems, UCSD. **Three-dimensional
meso-scale microscopic imaging provides novel geometrical details to
model diseased hearts: hear failure, arrhythmia, and defects associated
with metabolic diseases**

Abstract: New development and application of 3-dimensional electron
microscope technology, such as electron tomography, is revealing meso-
scale (near nanometer-scale) details of the architecture of
cardiomyocytes. The technology is redefining topology of functional
cellular domains including dyadic calcium releasing units (CRUs),
transverse tubules (T-tubules), and mitochondria. With the combined use
of genetically-modified and surgically/chemically-induced rodent models
of various cardiac diseases, our lab is linking structural defects to
functional abnormalities. Mapping entire nodal molecular events on
realistic cellular geometry and better understanding cellular and
molecular pathology in 4-dimensions (including spatial and temporal
dimensions) are our goal.

Zeyun Yu, PhD, Affiliation: Depart of Computer Science, U. Wisconsin,
Milwaukee. **Geometric Modeling of Ventricular Myocytes: Bridging the
Gap between Imaging and Simulation**

Abstract: Membrane-bound organelles in ventricular myocytes have been
imaged and reconstructed with electron microscopic (EM) tomography and
two-photon microscopy (T-PM). Of particular interest in our study are
two types of calcium-handling organelles, transverse tubules (T-tubules)
and junctional sarcoplasmic reticulum (jSR), which, together with the
associated receptors, form individual calcium release units (CRUs) and
play an important role in regulating the excitation-contraction (E-C)
coupling through dynamic calcium mobilization. While many mathematical
models have been proposed to study the calcium signaling in
cardiomyocytes, most of them however are based on simple geometries such
as rectangular or cylindrical shapes. Building 3D high-fidelity
geometric models from imaging data would make mathematical simulation
more accurate, which in turn could provide us a better understanding of
the E-C coupling in ventricular myocytes.

In this talk, I will discuss a number of image processing, feature
extraction and mesh generation techniques to construct high-quality
surface and volumetric meshes from 3-D EM and T-PM imaging data at
nanometer and micrometer scales respectively. These models are being
used to simulate calcium releasing, diffusion and buffering in
ventricular myocytes. In addition, I will demonstrate some preliminary
results on MCell-based simulation of calcium releasing within a single
CRU.

Yuhui Cheng, PhD and Anushka Michailova, PhD **Numerical analysis of Ca
signaling in rodent ventricular myocytes with realistic transverse-axial
tubular geometry**

A tight coupling between cell structure, ionic fluxes and intracellular
Ca2+ transients underlies the regulation of cardiac cell function. To
investigate how the distribution of membrane Ca2+ fluxes and t-tubule
microanatomy may affect these coupled processes we developed a 3D model
of Ca2+-signaling, buffering and diffusion. The realistic t-tubule
geometry was derived from the light and electron microscopy structural
data in rodent ventricular myocytes. To solve the nonlinear
reaction-diffusion system we successfully extended SMOL software tool
([http://mccammon.ucsd.edu/smol/](http://mccammon.ucsd.edu/smol/ "http://mccammon.ucsd.edu/smol/")).
The multiple tests have demonstrated that SMOL program is robust and
flexible for various boundary and initial conditions. The analysis
suggests that the quantitative understanding of the Ca2+ signaling in
cardiac cells requires accurate knowledge of cardiac ultra-structure and
Ca2+- handling protein distributions.

<br>

#### 2010

**January 12** Virtual environment for EM tomography

**February 21** Advanced visualization using TDW and CAVE

**March 25** Electrostatic Steering in Substrate Recognition

**April 25** Mesoscale modeling

**October 28** Blender based visualization and interface with NBCR
applications

Johan Hake, Pete Kenes-Huskey **Surface mesh improvements and volumetric
mesh generation using GAMer/FEtk and Blender**

Surface meshes can be generated using segmented images of biological
tissue. However, one often needs to improve the quality of such meshes
for use in computational models. GAMer is a Geometry-preserving
Adaptive-MeshER that has been shown to vastly improve surface mesh
quality while preserving geometrical features. As part of the FEtk
umbrella, it features a GUI interface to a commonly-used mesh
manipulation tool, Blender. We will demonstrate the application of GAMer
within Blender, along with a tutorial on mesh improvement for ITK-SNAP,
Imod and LatticeData. In this demonstration we also present an interface
for marking boundaries via Blender and subsequent preparation of
volumetric meshes for use in finite element simulations.

Ludovic Autin, Graham Jonhson, Michel Sanner, Arthur Olson **Embedded
Python Molecular Viewer**

We have developed an open-source plug-in, embedded Python Molecular
Viewer (ePMV), that runs molecular modeling software directly inside of
professional 3D animation applications (hosts such as Blender, Cinema4D
and Maya) to provide simultaneous access the capabilities of all of the
systems. Uniting host and scientific algorithms into a single interface
allows users from varied backgrounds to assemble professional quality
visuals and to perform computational experiments with relative ease. We
will demonstrate the use of ePMV inside of both Blender and Cinema4D to:
1) use inverse kinematic to animate a protein ribbon backbone. 2)
initiate a molecular dynamics simulation from within the host viewport
by calling the external package Modeller. 3) interoperate multiple host
and Python functions to perform an interactive docking.

Tom Bartol, Justin Kinney, Shirley Pepke, Mary Kennedy, Terry Sejnowski
**MCellWiz: A Blender Based IDE for MCell**

MCell is a software environment for performing biophysically realistic
3D simulations of reaction-diffusion processes occurring in living
cells. A major stumbling block for new and experienced users of MCell is
the effort required to create 3D models for use in MCell. To remedy this
situation we have conceived of "MCellWiz", a complete integrated
development environment for creating and visualizing MCell models. We
will present an overview of our design philosophy for MCellWiz including
the model creation/simulation/visualization pipe-line, discuss how
Blender provides a good foundation upon which to build MCellWiz, and
demonstrate a proof-of-concept prototype of MCellWiz implemented as a
python plug-in for Blender.

**November 18** Multiscale and Multi-Physics Tools for Mesoscale
Modeling of Heart Diseases using Realistic Geometry

Masahiko Hoshijima, MD, Ph.D., UCSD. **Cardiac couplon architecture**

Abstract: A new paradigm of cell physiology is to link molecular events
to biological functions using spatially realistic computational
simulations. Herein, our interest has been to reevaluate the local
control theory of cardiac excitation-contraction (E-C) coupling. The
theory asserts that the cardiac E-C coupling is the stochastic summation
of discrete elemental calcium release events, i.e. evoked calcium
sparks; the theory has been thought to well explain the paradoxical
nature of E-C coupling, the coexistence of high-sensitivity and
robustness. To understand the individual architecture and the spatial
alignment of couplons, which are the anatomic element of calcium sparks,
we utilize two distinctive advanced electron microscopic (EM)
technologies, i.e. EM tomography and serial block-face scanning EM.
Newly revealed 3-dimentional geometric features of cardiac couplons will
be discussed.

Rick Lawrence, Ph.D., UCSD **Recent Developments in Large-Scale
Electron Microscope Tomography**

Abstract: Electron microscope tomography (EMT) is a developing
technology for three dimensional nvestigation of cellular
ultrastructure. In combination with other techniques this technology can
provide three-dimensional reconstructions of protein assemblies,
correlates structure with functional investigations at the light
microscope level and provide structural information which extends the
findings of genomics and molecular biology. On one hand, EMT is not
presently a unified field of study, but is comprised of a variety of
techniques, roughly associated with the spatial scales of interest, and
the nature of the objects under investigation. Researchers commonly use
different techniques for elucidating the structure of small particles
and microfilaments (nanometer scale) as opposed to the structure of
cells and long range structure, such as exhibited by axons and dendrites
in neural tissue (micrometer scale). On the other hand, detailed
investigation of molecular structure in the context of the larger
structure of organelles, cells and cell assemblies in tissues is crucial
to the resolution of many research problems in biology. We believe that
with further research in instrumentation, sample preparation and
reconstruction the imaging of molecular structure in context should be
achievable.

Zeyun Yu, Ph.D., UW-Milwaukee **Adaptive and Quality Tetrahedral Mesh
Generation**

Abstract: Tetrahedral meshes are being extensively used in finite
element methods. I will briefly present an algorithm to generate
adaptive and quality tetrahedral meshes from surface mesh models. The
top-down octree data structure, together with the body centered cubic
lattice, is used to construct tetrahedral meshes. The boundary elements
are specially treated by a modified marching-cube method to achieve good
mesh quality. A user-friendly GUI will be demonstrated to manipulate and
visualize the tetrahedral meshes.

Anushka Michailova, PhD, Department of Bioengineering, UCSD and Yuhui
Cheng, PhD, PNNL **Multi-Scale Modeling in Rodent Ventricular Myocytes**

Abstract: In cardiac muscle cells calcium (Ca2+) is best known for its
role in contraction activation. Remarkable amount of quantitative data
on cardiac cell structure, ion- transporting protein distributions and
intracellular Ca2+ dynamics have been accumulated. Various alterations
in the protein distributions or cell ultra-structure are now recognized
to be the primary mechanisms of cardiac dysfunction in a diverse range
of common pathologies including cardiac arrhythmias and hypertrophy.
Using 3-D computational model, incorporating more realistic
transverse-axial t-tubule geometry and considering geometric
irregularities and inhomogeneities in the distribution of
ion-transporting proteins, we analyze several important spatial and
temporal features of Ca2+ signaling in rat ventricular myocytes. This
study demonstrates that the computational models could serve as powerful
tools for prediction and analyses on how the Ca2+ dynamics and cardiac
excitation-contraction coupling are regulated under normal conditions or
certain pathologies. The use of computational and mathematical
approaches will help also to better understand aspects of cell functions
that are not currently amenable to experimental investigation.

